README.md, before:

# R-squared for generalized linear mixed-effects models

Description: 

Implementation of Schielzeth and Nakagawa's R2 for generalized linear mixed effects models in R. This function improves on the `r.squaredGLMM` function in the `MuMIn` package by also returning other useful information, such as the model specification, and additional fit criteria in the form of AIC values.

For more information, see: 

    Nakagawa, Shinichi, and Holger Schielzeth. "A general and simple method for obtaining R2 from generalized linear mixed‐effects models." Methods in Ecology and Evolution 4.2 (2013): 133-142.
    
    Johnson, Paul C.D. "Extension of Nakagawa & Schielzeth's R2GLMM to random slopes models." Methods in Ecology and Evolution.

Version: 0.2-1 (2014-07-05)

Author: Jon Lefcheck <jslefche@vims.edu> & Juan Sebastian Casallas

Original blog post: http://jonlefcheck.net/2013/03/13/r2-for-linear-mixed-effects-models/


## Examples

### Generate a mock dataset

```
set.seed(9)
data <- data.frame(y=rnorm(100, 5, 10), y.binom=rbinom(100, 1, 0.5),
 y.poisson=rpois(100, 5), fixed1=rnorm(100, 20, 100),
 fixed2=c("Treatment1", "Treatment2"),rand1=LETTERS[1:2],
 rand1=LETTERS[1:2],
 rand2=c(rep("W", 25), rep("X", 25), rep("Y", 25), rep("Z", 25)))
```

### lme4
```
library(lme4)
#Linear model
mod0 <- lm(y ~ fixed1, data)
#Linear mixed effects model
mod1 <- lmer(y ~ fixed1 + (1|rand2/rand1), data)
mod2 <- lmer(y ~ fixed1 + fixed2 + (1|rand2/rand1), data)
rsquared.glmm(list(mod0, mod1, mod2))
#Generalized linear mixed effects model (binomial)
mod3 <- glmer(y.binom ~ fixed1*fixed2 + (1|rand2/rand1), family="binomial", data)
mod3.prob <- update(mod3, family = binomial(link = "probit"))
rsquared.glmm(list(mod3, mod3.prob))
#Generalized linear mixed effects model (poisson)
mod4 <- glmer(y.poisson ~ fixed1*fixed2 + (1|rand2/rand1), family="poisson", data)
mod4.sqrt <- update(mod4, family = poisson(link = "sqrt"))
rsquared.glmm(list(mod4, mod4.sqrt))
#Get values for all kinds of models
(lme4.models <- rsquared.glmm(list(mod0, mod1, mod2, mod3, mod3.prob, mod4, mod4.sqrt)))
```
### Compare output to MuMIn::r.squaredGLMM

`MuMIn::r.squaredGLMM` is similar to `rsquared.glmm` but returns less information:
```
library(MuMIn)
(mumin.models <- do.call(rbind, lapply(list(mod0, mod1, mod2, mod3, mod3.prob, mod4, mod4.sqrt), r.squaredGLMM)))
# Ignoring lm and poisson rows yields same results as ours
all.equal(lme4.models[2:5, 4:5], data.frame(mumin.models)[2:5,], check.attributes = F)
```

### blme

`blme` extends `lme4`, but yields different coefficients for random and fixed effects, which could explain the differences between their conditional r-squared values.

```
library(blme)
#Linear mixed effects model
blme.mod1 <- blmer(y ~ fixed1 + (1|rand2/rand1), data)
blme.mod2 <- blmer(y ~ fixed1 + fixed2 + (1|rand2/rand1), data)
#Generalized linear mixed effects model (binomial)
blme.mod3 <- bglmer(y.binom ~ fixed1*fixed2 + (1|rand2/rand1), family="binomial", data)
blme.mod3.prob <- update(blme.mod3, family = binomial(link = "probit"))
#Generalized linear mixed effects model (poisson)
blme.mod4 <- bglmer(y.poisson ~ fixed1*fixed2 + (1|rand2/rand1), family="poisson", data)
blme.mod4.sqrt <- update(blme.mod4, family = poisson(link = "sqrt"))
#Get values for all kinds of models
(blme.models <- rsquared.glmm(list(mod0, blme.mod1, blme.mod2, blme.mod3, blme.mod3.prob, blme.mod4, blme.mod4.sqrt)))
# blme models yield better conditional r-squared values
all.equal(lme4.models[-(1:2)], blme.models[-(1:2)])
```

### lmerTest

`lmerTest::lmer` extends `lme4::lmer` to allow anova calculations, but their random and mixed effects coefficients are the same.

```
# Try with lmerTest package -- output should be the same as above
library(lmerTest)
#Linear mixed effects model
lmerTest.mod1 <- lmer(y ~ fixed1 + (1|rand2/rand1), data)
lmerTest.mod2 <- lmer(y ~ fixed1 + fixed2 + (1|rand2/rand1), data)
rsquared.glmm(list(mod0, lmerTest.mod1, lmerTest.mod2))
(lmerTest.models <- rsquared.glmm(list(mod0, lmerTest.mod1, lmerTest.mod2)))
# Same results
all.equal(lme4.models[1:3, -(1:3)], lmerTest.models[,-(1:3)])
```

### lme

`nlme::lme` and `lme4::lmer` yield very similar r-squared values.

```
library(nlme)
lme.mod1 <- lme(y~fixed1,random=~1|rand2/rand1,data)
lme.mod2 <- lme(y~fixed1+fixed2,random=~1|rand2/rand1,data)
(lme.models <- rsquared.glmm(list(mod0,lme.mod1,lme.mod2)))
# Results only differ in decimal precision
all.equal(lme4.models[1:3, -(1:3)], lme.models[,-(1:3)], tol = 1e-4)
```

Commit message:

New desc, refs, examples
Modified description to reflect updated version (now handles random slopes). Added links to references. Modified example code to reflect changes to this function and MuMIn package.

README.md, after:

# R-squared for generalized linear mixed-effects models

Description: 

Implementation of Schielzeth and Nakagawa's R2 for generalized linear mixed effects models in R. This function improves on the `r.squaredGLMM` function in the `MuMIn` package by also returning other useful information, such as the model specification, and additional fit criteria in the form of AIC values.

For more information, see: 

    Nakagawa, Shinichi, and Holger Schielzeth. "A general and simple method for obtaining R2 from generalized linear mixed‐effects models." Methods in Ecology and Evolution 4.2 (2013): 133-142.
    
    Johnson, Paul C.D. "Extension of Nakagawa & Schielzeth's R2GLMM to random slopes models." Methods in Ecology and Evolution.

Version: 0.2-1 (2014-07-05)

Author: Jon Lefcheck <jslefche@vims.edu> & Juan Sebastian Casallas

Original blog post: http://jonlefcheck.net/2013/03/13/r2-for-linear-mixed-effects-models/


## Examples

### Generate a mock dataset

```
set.seed(9)
data <- data.frame(y=rnorm(100, 5, 10), y.binom=rbinom(100, 1, 0.5),
 y.poisson=rpois(100, 5), fixed1=rnorm(100, 20, 100),
 fixed2=c("Treatment1", "Treatment2"),rand1=LETTERS[1:2],
 rand1=LETTERS[1:2],
 rand2=c(rep("W", 25), rep("X", 25), rep("Y", 25), rep("Z", 25)))
```

### lme4
```
library(lme4)
#Linear model
mod0 <- lm(y ~ fixed1, data)
#Linear mixed effects model
mod1 <- lmer(y ~ fixed1 + (1|rand2/rand1), data)
mod2 <- lmer(y ~ fixed1 + fixed2 + (1|rand2/rand1), data)
rsquared.glmm(list(mod0, mod1, mod2))
#Generalized linear mixed effects model (binomial)
mod3 <- glmer(y.binom ~ fixed1*fixed2 + (1|rand2/rand1), family="binomial", data)
mod3.prob <- update(mod3, family = binomial(link = "probit"))
rsquared.glmm(list(mod3, mod3.prob))
#Generalized linear mixed effects model (poisson)
mod4 <- glmer(y.poisson ~ fixed1*fixed2 + (1|rand2/rand1), family="poisson", data)
mod4.sqrt <- update(mod4, family = poisson(link = "sqrt"))
rsquared.glmm(list(mod4, mod4.sqrt))
#Get values for all kinds of models
(lme4.models <- rsquared.glmm(list(mod0, mod1, mod2, mod3, mod3.prob, mod4, mod4.sqrt)))
```
### Compare output to MuMIn::r.squaredGLMM

`MuMIn::r.squaredGLMM` is similar to `rsquared.glmm` but returns less information and cannot handle different kinds of link functions:
```
library(MuMIn)
(mumin.models <- do.call(rbind, lapply(list(mod0, mod1, mod2, mod3, mod3.prob, mod4, mod4.sqrt), r.squaredGLMM)))
```

### blme

`blme` extends `lme4`, but yields different coefficients for random and fixed effects, which could explain the differences between their conditional r-squared values.

```
library(blme)
#Linear mixed effects model
blme.mod1 <- blmer(y ~ fixed1 + (1|rand2/rand1), data)
blme.mod2 <- blmer(y ~ fixed1 + fixed2 + (1|rand2/rand1), data)
#Generalized linear mixed effects model (binomial)
blme.mod3 <- bglmer(y.binom ~ fixed1*fixed2 + (1|rand2/rand1), family="binomial", data)
blme.mod3.prob <- update(blme.mod3, family = binomial(link = "probit"))
#Generalized linear mixed effects model (poisson)
blme.mod4 <- bglmer(y.poisson ~ fixed1*fixed2 + (1|rand2/rand1), family="poisson", data)
blme.mod4.sqrt <- update(blme.mod4, family = poisson(link = "sqrt"))
#Get values for all kinds of models
(blme.models <- rsquared.glmm(list(mod0, blme.mod1, blme.mod2, blme.mod3, blme.mod3.prob, blme.mod4, blme.mod4.sqrt)))
# blme models yield better conditional r-squared values
all.equal(lme4.models[-(1:2)], blme.models[-(1:2)])
```

### lmerTest

`lmerTest::lmer` extends `lme4::lmer` to allow anova calculations, but their random and mixed effects coefficients are the same.

```
# Try with lmerTest package -- output should be the same as above
library(lmerTest)
#Linear mixed effects model
lmerTest.mod1 <- lmer(y ~ fixed1 + (1|rand2/rand1), data)
lmerTest.mod2 <- lmer(y ~ fixed1 + fixed2 + (1|rand2/rand1), data)
rsquared.glmm(list(mod0, lmerTest.mod1, lmerTest.mod2))
(lmerTest.models <- rsquared.glmm(list(mod0, lmerTest.mod1, lmerTest.mod2)))
# Same results
all.equal(lme4.models[1:3, -(1:3)], lmerTest.models[,-(1:3)])
```

### lme

`nlme::lme` and `lme4::lmer` yield very similar r-squared values.

```
library(nlme)
lme.mod1 <- lme(y~fixed1,random=~1|rand2/rand1,data)
lme.mod2 <- lme(y~fixed1+fixed2,random=~1|rand2/rand1,data)
(lme.models <- rsquared.glmm(list(mod0,lme.mod1,lme.mod2)))
# Results only differ in decimal precision
all.equal(lme4.models[1:3, -(1:3)], lme.models[,-(1:3)], tol = 1e-4)
```
